vi is command is used edit the text and to create a file. vi stands for "visual Editor".

One best example for create, edit, write, to add lines , to save and to quit.

1.vi file.txt - to create if the file isn't existed or open a file if it is existed.

2.i  - if you want to write or edit a file you have to press i the you can write or edit in a file.

3. :w - to save the file you have to click Esc then click ":w".

4.j - to move to second line then we can insert or write the second. After enring j you have to press O to type.

5.dd - to delete a line in the file you have to move to the second line then press dd

6.yy - to copy a line you have to move to the line you wanted then press yy.

7.p - to pate the copied text.

8. :set nu - to show line numbers we have to click esc then enter the command 

9. :wq - to save and exit at the time.




vi commands are 4 types:

i. Insert mode `commands:

1.i - insert before the cluster .

2.I - insert at the beginning of a line.

3.a - append after the curser.

4.A - append at the end of the line.

5.o - open new line below and enter insert mode.

6.O - open new line above and enter insert mode. 


ii. Navigation Commands:

1.h - move left one character.

2.l move right one character.

3.k - move up one line. I is mainly used when editing multiple lines.

4.j - move down one line.

5.w - move to the start of next word.

6.b - move back to start of previous word.

7.0 - move to moves to start of line.

8.$ - move to end of line.

9.gg - go to first line of file.

10.G - go to last line of file.


iii. Editing commands:

1.x - to delete current character under cursor. 

2.dd - delete entire line.

3.yy - copy current fille.

4.p - paste after current line or character.

5.u - undo last action.

6.ctrl+r - redo what u undid.


iv. Last line mode commands:
    It being with :

1.:w - save the file.

2.:q - quit ( It only work if you saved the file before this command).

3.:wq or :zz - to save and quit.

4.:q! - quit without saving the file.

5.:set nu - show line numbers.

6.:set nonu - Hide line numbers.

